Every stand-up comedian will tell you that
it's easier to get an audience to laugh when
it's someone else's religion that you're making
fun of,
and the hardest thing is to get people to
question and look at their own religion, their
own culture.
I don't know, maybe that just means that you're
not a very good stand-up comedian.
Whenever we're talking about religion, I think it's important to ask, "Why are some subjects taboo?".
Why is it that they're not a laughing matter. Why is it that they're something we can't
talk about casually, critically, incisively?
Why is it that people sit up straight in their seats, or avoid the issue?
Why is it that some issues get into the realm of hysteria, extreme opinions shutting down [any] discourse? And, uh, the whole question of the historical
Buddha... it's, it's in that area, where you
should ask, "Why is it that people fly off
the handle on this issue?"
Why is it that even respectable, academic
articles, will suddenly start shouting that,
y'know, somebody is an imperialist, somebody
is some kind of thought-criminal, for even
talking in terms of the historical Buddha?
Why is that so loaded?
And, y'know, [if we] shift the frame of reference
to one of the most influential religions in
the history of the world that, today, nobody
believes in, [i.e.,] what about the cult of
Herakles? (A name you probably know as Hercules.)
You may have seen cartoons made out of the
guy. You may have seen a vase in a museum.
You have thousands and thousands of artefacts
of Herakles, hundreds of stories, myths, legends,
and if someone said to you, "You know, I think
you can look through the legends of Herakles
and pick out a few that represent the historical
reality of Herakles," nobody would get angry
[at this suggestion], nobody would get uncomfortable,
and nobody would accuse you of being an imperialist,
or, ah, supporting some kind of terrible,
dangerous tendency.
But, if you did that, all you would be doing,
is making a selection. You would be sitting
there, as a modern reader, looking at the
myths presented to you, looking at the archaeological
remains, and saying, "These are the ones that
appeal to me." These are my preference, these
are my choice.
So, you're not uncovering something new.
If you compare a myth to a myth, the result
is a myth.
You can engage in comparative mythology, but
all that you're discovering is your own preference,
your own selection. You're not producing new
evidence.
With that being said, if you read ancient
sources, on Herakles, they were already interested
in this possibility. Already, in Herodotus,
your see Herodotus discussing that there's
a more theological Herakles, a figure of myth
and legend, but that there's also an historical
reality of a guy who was a king, a warrior,
and who was a real human being, and, you know,
[there are] some questions as to how we can
separate the two, or what stories are theological
and what really reflect that reality (the
ultimate historical origins, of the myths
of Herakles).
Um, y'know, if you read Aristotle, there's
a moment where he discusses the fact that
in ancient Greece, the disease epilepsy was
named after Herakles. People would call it
"Herakles-disease", in the same way that today
we have diseases named after famous people,
famous people who happened to have the disease,
like Lou Gehrig's Disease. And, y'know, for
sure, there's a feeling, that you're not treading
on the familiar ground of mythology any more.
There's a feeling that there's a human reality,
an historical reality, leaping off the page
at you there. And you realize that if there
was a big, strong guy named Herakles (probably
not super-human or supernatural), but if there
was a big, dangerous guy, and he had epilepsy,
then you imagine how memorable that would
be, and how terrifying that would have been,
for everyone who knew him, maybe for everyone
in his kingdom. Whenever he had a seizure,
whenever he had an epileptic fit, all the
people around him [would have] had to stand
back, or had to try to restrain him.
So, it's natural for people to want to make
that selection, for people to look at mythology
and say, "Yeah, I choose this as historical
reality", but what you can't lose sight of
is that what you're doing is just an act of
selection. You're just revealing your own
bias, as a modern reader, as a modern interpreter.
And the ancient sources, like Herodotus, that
were looking back at even earlier sources,
they were engaged in the same thing. They
were saying, from their own perspective in
time, "Okay, this is what I feel is historically
real". This is what resonates with me, this
is what speaks to me.
And, with the (sigh) idée fixe of the historical
Buddha, the real problem is we don't deal
with just one round of selection. Scholars
get into a cycle, and it's like the childrens'
game "broken telephone". First they select
some group of texts, some set of ideas, as
definitively historical, and then they get
into both manufacturing new evidence out of
it, and (even worse) suppressing other evidence.
[They] get into proposing, "Okay, let's pretend
this evidence doesn't exist, and (laughter)
let's pretend some other evidence does." That's
a little more complex, how scholars manage
to do that [i.e., misrepresenting evidence].
[With] the historical Buddha, once you've been through a few stages, a few cycles, in this game,
you start to get an idea that while it was meant to select what's most meaningful, most interesting, most philosophical,
maybe, out of the ancient texts, it instead
becomes a distorting, biased, myopic misrepresentation,
of what the texts do and don't say.
For me, one of the most common experiences
in my life has been (including when I speak
to people with PhDs in Buddhist Studies) that
when I just talk openly about hell being a
major part of Buddhism, there's... gasp! Suddenly
they draw in their breath. When I was giving
a lecture at S.O.A.S., the University of London,
during the question-and-answer period afterwards,
I said, "Yeah, of course, almost on every
page of the canon we're dealing with this
idea of hell and the afterlife," and... gasp!
You could hear, people sat up in their seats,
people got uncomfortable. And that crowd,
well, there were probably more Burmese people
in the crowd than any other ethnic group.
We had white people, but also different Asian
scholars and students of Buddhism there.
And, y'know, how can such a major idea become
taboo? Well, it's because people went through
a cycle of saying, "Oh, no, no, no, the real
Buddha, the original Buddha, the historical
Buddha, he didn't teach hell."
So, "therefore", ignore all of this evidence,
and direct your attention to only little bits
and pieces of evidence.
Now, y'know, was there a real guy named Herakles?
Or that people called Herakles to flatter
him? [Was there this guy who] was big and
strong, and beat people to death with a club?
Or, was the club --as a symbol of Herakles--
something that only appears relatively late
in the art-history, in the development of
iconography. Is that original or not? You
can ask those questions, but the trick is
to never lose sight of your role as a modern
interpreter, asking those questions; and to
never, never let yourself, get into a frame
of mind of denying what's on the piece of
paper in front of you; to never be the person
who takes on the role of imposing modern values
and modern expectations onto ancient texts.